1 Introduction 
on measures for inter-rater reliability (Carletta, 1996), on frameworks for 
evaluating spoken dialogue agents (Walker et al., 1998) and on the use of 
different corpora in the development of a particular system (The Carnegie-Mellon 
Communicator, Eskenazi et al. (1999)). The question we are addressing in this 
paper is how to collect and analyse relevant corpora. We begin by describing 
what we consider to be the main advantages and disadvantages of the two 
currently used methods; studies of human dialogues and Wizard of Oz-dialogues, 
especially focusing on the ecological validity of the methods. We then describe 
a m e t h o d called 'distilling dialogues', which can serve as a supplement to 
the other two.
 
It has been known for quite some time now, that the language used when 
interacting with a computer is different from the one used in dialogues between 
people, (c.f. JSnsson and Dahlb~ick (1988)). Given that we know that the 
language will be different, but not how it will be different, we need to base 
our development of natural language dialogue systems on a relevant set of 
dialogue corpora. It is our belief that we need to clarify a number of different 
issues regarding the collection and use of corpora in the development of 
speech-only and multimodal dialogue systems. Exchanging experiences and 
developing guidelines in this area are as important as, and in some sense a 
necessary pre-requisite to, the development of computational models of speech, 
language, and dialogue/discourse. It is interesting to note the difference in 
the state of art in the field of natural language dialogue systems with that of 
corpus linguistics, where issues of the usefulness of different samples, the 
necessary sampling size, representativeness in corpus design and other have been 
discussed for quite some time (e.g. (Garside et al., 1997; Atkins et al., 1992; 
Crowdy, 1993; Biber, 1993)). Also the neighboring area of evaluation of NLP 
systems (for an overview, see Sparck Jones and Galliers (1996)) seems to have 
advanced further. Some work have been done in the area of natural language 
dialogue systems, e.g. on the design of Wizard of Oz-studies (Dahlb~ck et al., 
1998),
 
2
 
Natural and Wizard of Oz-Dialogues
 
The advantage of using real dialogues between people is that they will 
illustrate which tasks and needs that people actually bring to a particular 
service provider. Thus, on the level of the users' general goals, such dialogues 
have a high validity. But there are two drawbacks here. First; it is not 
self-evident that users will have the same task expectations from a computer 
system as they have with a person. Second, the language used will differ from 
the language used when interacting with a computer. These two disadvantages have 
been the major force behind the development of Wizard of Ozmethods. The 
advantage here is that the setting will be human-computer interaction. But there 
are important disadvantages, too. First, on the practical side, the task of 
setting up a high quality simulation environment and training the operators 
('wizards') to use this is a resource consuming task (Dahlb~ck et al., 1998). 
Second, and probably even more important, is that we cannot then observe real 
users using a system for real life tasks, where they bring their own needs, 
motivations, resources, and constraints to bear. To some extent this problem can 
be overcome using well-designed so called 'scenarios'. As pointed out in 
Dahlb~ck (1991), on many levels of analysis the artificiality of the situation 
will not af-
 
fifect the language used. An example of this is the pattern of 
pronoun-antecedent relations. But since the tasks given to the users are often 
pre-described by the researchers, this means t h a t this is not a good way of 
finding out which tasks the users actually want to perform. Nor does it provide 
a clear enough picture on how the users will act to find something t h a t 
satisfies their requirements. If e.g. the task is one of finding a charter 
holiday trip or buying a TVset within a specified set of constraints (economical 
and other), it is conceivable t h a t people will stay with the first item t h a 
t matches the specification, whereas in real life they would probably look for 
alternatives. In our experience, this is primarily a concern if the focus is on 
the users' goals and plans, but is less a problem when the interest is on 
lowerlevel aspects, such as, syntax or patterns of pronounantecedent 
relationship (c.f. Dahlb~ick (1991)). To summarize; real life dialogues will 
provide a reasonably correct picture of the way users' approach their tasks, and 
what tasks they bring to the service provider, but the language used will not 
give a good approximation of what the system under construction will need to 
handle. Wizard of Ozdialogues, on the other hand, will give a reasonable 
approximation of some aspects of the language used, but in an artificial 
context. The usual approach has been to work in three steps. First analyse real 
h u m a n dialogues, and based on these, in the second phase, design one or more 
Wizard of Oz-studies. The final step is to fine-tune the system's performance on 
real users. A good example of this method is presented in Eskenazi et al. 
(1999). But there are also possible problems with this approach (though we are 
not claiming that this was the case in their particular project). Eskenazi et 
al. (1999) asked a h u m a n operator to act 'computerlike' in their Wizard of 
Oz-phase. The advantage is of course that the h u m a n operator will be able to 
perform all the tasks t h a t is usually provided by this service. The 
disadvantage is t h a t it puts a heavy burden on the h u m a n operator to act 
as a computer. Since we know that lay-persons' ideas of what computers can and 
cannot do are in m a n y respects far removed from what is actually the case, we 
risk introducing some systematic distortion here. And since it is difficult to 
perform consistently in similar situations, we also risk introducing 
non-systematic distortion here, even in those cases when the 'wizard' is an 
NLP-professional. Our suggestion is therefore to supplement the above mentioned 
methods, and bridge the gap between them, by post-processing h u m a n dialogues 
to give them a computer-like quality. The advantage, compared to having people 
do the simulation on the fly, is both that it can be done with more consistency, 
and also that it can be done by researchers
 
t h a t actually know what h u m a n - c o m p u t e r natural language 
dialogues can look like. A possible disadvantage with using both Wizard of 
Oz-and real computer dialogues, is that users will quickly a d a p t to what the 
system can provide t h e m with, and will therefore not try to use it for tasks 
they know it cannot perform. Consequently, we will not get a full picture of the 
different services they would like the system to provide. A disadvantage with 
this method is, of course, t h a t post-processing takes some time compared to 
using the natural dialogues as they are. There is also a concern on the 
ecological validity of the results, as discussed later.
 
Distilling dialogues
 
Distilling dialogues, i.e. re-writing h u m a n interactions in order to have 
them reflect what a humancomputer interaction could look like involves a number 
of considerations. The main issue is t h a t in corp o r a of natural dialogues 
one of the interlocutors is not a dialogue system. The system's task is instead 
performed by a h u m a n and the problem is how to anticipate the behaviour of a 
system that does not exist based on the performance of an agent with different 
performance characteristics. One important aspect is how to deal with h u m a n 
features that are not part of what the system is supposed to be a b l e to 
handle, for instance if the user talks about things outside of the domain, such 
as discussing an episode of a recent T V show. It also involves issues on how to 
handle situations where one of the interlocuters discusses with someone else on 
a different topic, e.g. discussing the up-coming Friday party with a friend in 
the middle of an information providing dialogue with a customer. It is i m p o r 
t a n t for the distilling process to have at least an outline of the dialogue 
system t h a t is under development: Will it for instance have the capacity to 
recognise users' goals, even if not explicitly stated? Will it be able to reason 
about the discourse domain? W h a t services will it provide, and what will be 
outside its capacity to handle? In our case, we assume that the planned dialogue 
system has the ability to reason on various aspects of dialogue and properties 
of the application. In our current work, and in the examples used for 
illustration in this paper, we assume a dialogue model that can handle any 
relevant dialogue phenomenon and also an interpreter and speech recogniser being 
able to understand any user input that is relevant to the task. There is is also 
a powerful domain reasoning module allowing for more or less any knowledge 
reasoning on issues that can be accomplished within the domain (Flycht-Eriksson, 
1999). Our current system does, however, not have an explicit user task model, 
as opposed to a system task model (Dahlb~ick
 
fiand JSnsson, 1999), which is included, and thus, we can not assume that the 
'system' remembers utterances where the user explains its task. Furthermore, as 
our aim is system development we will not consider interaction outside the 
systems capabilities as relevant to include in the distilled dialogues. The 
context of our work is the development a multi-modal dialogue system. However, 
in our current work with distilling dialogues, the abilities of a multi-modal 
system were not fully accounted for. The reason for this is that the dialogues 
would be significantly affected, e.g. a telephone conversation where the user 
always likes to have the n e x t connection, please will result in a table if 
multi-modal output is possible and hence a fair amount of the dialogne is 
removed. We have therefore in this paper analysed the corpus assuming a 
speech-only system, since this is closer to the original telephone 
conversations, and hence needs fewer assumptions on system performance when 
distilling the dialogues.
 
distilling. The system might in such cases provide less information. The 
principle of providing all relevant information is based on the assumption that 
a computer system often has access to all relevant information when querying the 
background system and can also present it more conveniently, especially in a 
multimodal system (Ahrenberg et al., 1996). A typical example is the dialogue 
fragment in figure 1. In this fragment the system provides information on what 
train to take and how to change to a bus. The result of distilling this fragment 
provides the revised fragment of figure 2. As seen in the fragment of figure 2 
we also remove a number of utterances typical for human interaction, as 
discussed below.
 * S y s t e m utterances are m a d e m o r e computer-like and do n o t include 
irrelevant i n f o r m a t i o n . The
 
Distillation
 
guidelines
 
Distilling dialogues requires guidelines for how to handle various types of 
utterances. In this section we will present our guidelines for distilling a 
corpus of telephone conversations between a human information provider on local 
buses 1 to be used for developing a multimodal dialogue system (Qvarfordt and 
JSnsson, 1998; Flycht-Eriksson and JSnsson, 1998; Dahlb~ick et al., 1999; 
Qvarfordt, 1998). Similar guidelines are used within another project on 
developing Swedish Dialogue Systems where the domain is travel bureau 
information. We can distinguish three types of contributors: 'System' (i.e. a 
future systems) utterances, User utterances, and other types, such as moves by 
other speakers, and noise.
 
latter is seen in $9 in the dialogue in figure 3 where the provided information 
is not relevant. It could also be possible to remove $5 and respond with $7 at 
once. This, however, depends on if the information grounded in $5-U6 is needed 
for the 'system' in order to know the arrival time or if that could be concluded 
from U4. This in turn depends on the system's capabilities. If we assume that 
the dialogue system has a model of user tasks, the information in $5-U6 could 
have been concluded from that. We will, in this case, retain $5-U6 as we do not 
assume a user task model (Dahlb/ick and JSnsson, 1999) and in order to stay as 
close to the original dialogue as possible. The next problem concerns the case 
when 'system' utterances are changed or removed.
  Dialogue contributions provided by s o m e t h i n g or s o m e o n e other 
than the u s e r or the ' s y s t e m ' are removed. These are regarded as not 
being part
 
Modifying system utterances
 
The problem of modifying 'system' utterances can be divided into two parts: how 
to change and when to change. They are in some respects intertwined, but as the 
how-part affects the when-part more we will take this as a starting point.
  The ' s y s t e m ' provides as m u c h relevant inform a t i o n as possible 
at once. This depends on
 
the capabilities of the systems output modalities. If we have a screen or 
similar output device we present as much as possible which normally is all 
relevant information. If we, on the other hand, only have spoken output the 
amount of information that the hearer can interpret in one utterance must be 
considered when
 1The bus time table dialogues are collected at LinkSping University and are 
available (in Swedish) on http://www.ida.liu.se/~arnjo/kfb/dialoger.html
 
of the interaction. This means that if someone interrupts the current 
interaction, say that the telephone rings during a face-to-face interaction, the 
interrupting interaction is normally removed from the corpus. Furthermore, 
'system' interruptions are removed. A human can very well interrupt another 
human interlocuter, but a computer system will not do that. However, this 
guideline could lead to problems, for instance, when users follow up such 
interruptions. If no information is provided or the interrupted sequence does 
not affect the dialogue, we have no problems removing the interruption. The 
problem is what to do when information from the 'system' is used in the 
continuing dialogue. For such cases we have no fixed strategy,
 
yes I wonder if you have any m m buses or (.) like express buses leaving from 
LinkSping to Vadstena (.) on sunday
 
ja ville undra om ni hade ndgra 5h bussar eUer (.) typ expressbussar sore dkte 
frdn LinkSping till Vadstena (.) pd sSnda $5: no the bus does not run on sundays 
nej bussen g~r inte pd sSndagar U6: how can you (.) can you take the train and 
then change some way (.) because (.) to MjSlby 'n' so hur kan man (.) kan man ta 
tdg d sen byta p~ ndtt sStt (.) fSr de (.) till mjSlby ~ sd $7: that you can do 
too yes de kan du gSra ocksd ja U8: how (.) do you have any such suggestions hut 
(.) har du n~ra n~gra s~na fSrslag $9: yes let's see (4s) a m o m e n t (15s) 
now let us see here (.) was it on the sunday you should travel ja ska se h~ir 
(4s) eft 5gonblick (15s) nu ska vise hSr (.) va de p~ sSndagen du skulle dka pd 
U10: yes right afternoon preferably ja just de eftermidda ggirna $11: afternoon 
preferable (.) you have train from LinkSping fourteen twenty nine eftermidda 
gSrna (.) du hat t~g frdn LinkSping fjorton d tjugonie U12: m m
 mm
 
S13: and then you will change from MjSlby station six hundred sixty
 
sd byter du frdn MjSlby station sexhundrasexti
 
sexhundrasexti
 $15: fifteen and ten
 
Figure 1: Dialogue fragment from a real interaction on bus time-table 
information U4: S5: U6: $7: I wonder if you have any buses or (.) like express 
buses going from LinkSping to Vadstena (.) on sunday no the bus does not run on 
sundays how can you (.) can you take the train and then change some way (.) 
because (.) to MjSlby and so you can take the train from LinkSping fourteen and 
twenty nine and then you will change at MjSlby station to bus six hundred sixty 
at fifteen and ten
 
Figure 2: A distilled version of the dialogue in figure 1 the dialogue needs to 
be rearranged depending on how the information is to be used (c.f. the 
discussion in the final section of this paper). in figure 4). A common case of 
this is when the ' s y s t e m ' is talking while looking for information, $5 in 
the dialogue fragment of figure 4 is an example of this. Related to this is when 
the system provides its own comments. If we can assume that it has such 
capabilities they are included, otherwise we remove them.
 
 'System' utterances which are no longer valid are removed. Typical examples of 
this are the utterances $7, $9, $11 and $13 in the dialogue fragment of figure 
1. * Remove sequences of utterances where the 'system' behaves in a way a 
computer would not do. For instance jokes, irony, humor, commenting on the other 
dialogue participant, or dropping the telephone (or whatever is going on in $7
 
The system does not repeat information that has already been provided unless 
explicitly asked to do so. In human interaction it is not uncommon to repeat 
what has been uttered for purposes other than to provide grounding information 
or feedback. This is for instance common during
 
'n' I must be at Resecentrum before fourteen and thirty five (.) 'cause we will 
going to the interstate buses
 
$5: U6: $7: aha (.) 'n' then you must be there around twenty past two something 
then
 
yes around t h a t
 
ja ungefgir
 let's see here ( l l s ) two hundred and fourteen R y d end station leaves forty 
six (.) thirteen 'n' forty six then you will be down fourteen oh seven (.)
 
jaha
 'n' (.) the next one takes you there (.) fourteen thirty seven (.) but t h a t 
is too late
 
Figure 3: Dialogue fragment from a real interaction on bus time-table 
information U2: $3: U4: $5: U6: $7: Well, hi (.) I a m going to Ugglegatan 
eighth
 
ja hej (.) ja ska till Ugglegatan dtta
 Yes
 
ja
 and (.) I wonder (.) it is somewhere in Tannefors
 
och (.) jag undrar (.) det ligger ndnstans i Tannefors
 Yes (.) I will see here one one I will look exactly where it is one m o m e n t 
please
 
ja (.) jag ska se hhr eft eft jag ska titta exakt vat det ligger eft 6gonblick 
barn
 Oh Yeah
 
(operator disconnects) (25s) m m (.) okey (hs) what the hell (2s) (operator 
connects again) hello yes
 
((Telefonisten kopplar ur sig)) (25s) iihh (.) okey (hs) de va sore ]aan (2s) 
((Telefonisten kopplar in sig igen)) halld ja
 
ja hej
 It is bus two hundred ten which runs on old tannefors road t h a t you have to 
take and get off at the bus stop at t h a t bus stop named vetegatan
 
Figure 4: Dialogue fragment from a natural bus timetable interaction search 
procedures as discussed above. want to develop systems where the user needs to 
restrict his/her behaviour to the capabilities of the dialogue system. However, 
there are certain changes m a d e to user utterances, in most cases as a 
consequence of changes of system utterances.
 
 The system does not ask for information it has already achieved. For instance 
asking again if it
 is on Sunday as in $9 in figure 1. This is not uncommon in h u m a n interaction 
and such utterances from the user are not removed. However, we can assume t h a 
t the dialogue system does not forget what has been talked about before. 4.2 M o 
d i f y i n g u s e r u t t e r a n c e s The general rule is to change user 
utterances as little as possible. The reason for this is that we do not
 
Utterances that are no longer valid are removed.
 The most common cases are utterances whose request has already been answered, as 
seen in the distilled dialogue in figure 2 of the dialogue in figure 1.
 
sixteen fifty five sexton ]emti/em U12: sixteen fifty five (.) aha sexton f e m 
t i / e m (.) jaha S13: bus line four hundred thirty five linje ]yrahundra 
tretti/em
 
Figure 5: Dialogue fragment from a natural bus timetable interaction  
Utterances are removed where the user discusses things that are in the 
environment. For instance commenting the 'systems' clothes or hair. This also 
includes other types of communicative signals such as laughter based on things 
outside the interaction, for instance, in the environment of the interlocuters. 
 User utterances can also be added in order to make the dialogue continue. In 
the dialogue in figure 5 there is nothing in the dialogue explaining why the 
system utters S13. In such cases we need to add a user utterance, e.g. Which bus 
is that?. However, it might turn out that there are cues, such as intonation, 
found when listening to the tapes. If such detailed analyses are carried out, we 
will, of course, not need to add utterances. Furthermore, it is sometimes the 
case t h a t the telephone operator deliberately splits the information into 
chunks t h a t can be comprehended by the user, which then must be considered in 
the distillation. 5 Applying the method
 
To illustrate the m e t h o d we will in this section t r y to characterise the 
results from our distillations. The illustration is based on 39 distilled 
dialogues from the previously mentioned corpus collected with a telephone 
operator having information on local bus time-tables and persons calling the 
information service. The distillation took a b o u t three hours for all 39 
dialogues, i.e. it is reasonably fast. The distilled dialogues are on the 
average 27% shorter. However, this varies between the dialogues, at most 73% was 
removed but there were also seven dialogues t h a t were not changed at all. At 
the most 34 utterances where removed from one single dialogue and that was from 
a dialogue with discussions on where to find a parking lot, i.e. discussions 
outside the capabilities of the application. There was one more dialogue where 
more t h a n 30 utterances were removed and that dialogue is a typical example 
of dialogues where distillation actually is very useful and also indicates what 
is normally removed from the dialogues. This particular dia-
 
logue begins with the user asking for the telephone number to 'the Lost property 
office' for a specific bus operator. However, the operator starts a discussion 
on what bus the traveller traveled on before providing the requested telephone 
number. The reason for this discussion is probably t h a t the operator knows 
that different bus companies are utilised and would like to make sure that the 
user really understands his/her request. The interaction t h a t follows can, 
thus, in t h a t respect be relevant, but for our purpose of developing systems 
based on an overall goal of providing information, not to understand human 
interaction, our dialogue system will not able to handle such phenomenon 
(JSnsson, 1996). The dialogues can roughly be divided into five different 
categories based on the users task. The discussion in twenty five dialogues were 
on bus times between various places, often one departure and one arrival but 
five dialogues involved more places. In five dialogues the discussion was one 
price and various types of discounts. Five users wanted to know the telephone 
number to 'the Lost property office', two discussed only bus stops and two 
discussed how they could utilise their season ticket to travel outside the 
trafficking area of the bus company. It is interesting to note that there is no 
correspondence between the task being performed during the interaction and the 
amount of changes made to the d i a logue. Thus, if we can assume that the 
amount of distillation indicates something about a user's interaction style, 
other factors t h a n the task are important when characterising user behaviour. 
Looking at what is altered we find t h a t the most i m p o r t a n t distilling 
principle is that the 'system' provides all relevant information at once, c.f. 
figures 1 and 2. This in turn removes utterances provided by both 'system' and 
user. Most added utterances, both from the user and the 'system', provide 
explicit requests for information that is later provided in the dialogue, e.g. 
utterance $3 in figure 6. We have added ten utterances in all 39 dialogues, five 
'system' utterances and five user utterances. Note, however, that we utilised 
the transcribed dialogues, without information on intonation. We would probably 
not have needed to add this m a n y utterances if we had utilised the tapes. Our 
reason for not using information on intonation is that we do not assume t h a t 
our system's speech recogniser can recognise intonation. Finally, as discussed 
above, we did not utilise the full potential of multi-modality when distilling 
the dialogues. For instance, some dialogues could be further distilled if we had 
assumed t h a t the system had presented a time-table. One reason for this is t 
h a t we wanted to capture as m a n y interesting aspects intact as possible. 
The advantage is, thus, that we have a better corpus for understanding human-
 
Yees hi Anna Nilsson is my name and I would like to take the bus from Ryd center 
to Resecentrum in LinkSping
 
jaa hej Anna Nilsson heter jag och jag rill ~ka buss ~r~n Ryds centrum till 
resecentrum i LinkSping.
 $3: U4: mm When do you want to leave? mm N~ir r i l l d u  k a ? 'n' I must be 
at Resecentrum before fourteen and thirty five (.) 'cause we will going to the 
interstate buses
 
ja ska va p~ rececentrum innan fjorton d trettifem (.) f5 vi ska till 
l~ngfiirdsbussarna
 
Figure 6: Distilled dialogue fragment with added utterance computer interaction 
and can from t h a t corpus do a second distillation where we focus more on 
multimodal interaction. One example of this is whether the system is meant to 
acquire information on the user's underlying motivations or goals or not. In the 
examples presented, we have not assumed such capabilities, but this assumption 
is not an absolute necessity. We believe, however, that the distilling process 
should be based on one such model, not the least to ensure a consistent t r e a 
t m e n t of similar recurring phenomena at different places in the corpora. The 
validity of the results based on analysing distilled dialogues depends p a r t l 
y on how the distillation has been carried out. Even when using natural 
dialogues we can have situations where the interaction is somewhat mysterious, 
for instance, if some of the dialogue participants behaves irrational such as 
not providing feedback or being too elliptical. However, if careful 
considerations have been made to stay as close to the original dialogues as 
possible, we believe that distilled dialogues will reflect what a hum a n would 
consider to be a natural interaction. Acknowledgments This work results from a n 
u m b e r of projects on development of natural language interfaces supported by 
The Swedish Transport & Communications Research Board (KFB) and the joint 
Research P r o g r a m for Language Technology ( H S F R / N U T E K ) . We are 
indebted to the participants of the Swedish Dialogue Systems project, especially 
to Staffan Larsson, Lena S a n t a m a r t a , and Annika Flycht-Eriksson for 
interesting discussions on this topic. 

Discussion
 
We have been presenting a method for distilling hum a n dialogues to make t h e 
m resemble h u m a n computer interaction, in order to utilise such dialogues as 
a knowledge source when developing dialogue systems. Our own main purpose has 
been to use t h e m for developing multimodal systems, however, as discussed 
above, we have in this p a p e r rather assumed a speech-only system. But we 
believe that the basic approach can be used also for multi-modal systems and 
other kinds of natural language dialogue systems. It is i m p o r t a n t to be 
aware of the limitations of the method, and how 'realistic' the produced result 
will be, compared to a dialogue with the final system. Since we are changing the 
dialogue moves, by for instance providing all required information in one move, 
or never asking to be reminded of what the user has previously requested, it is 
obvious t h a t what follows after the changed sequence would probably be 
affected one way or another. A consequence of this is that the resulting 
dialogue is less accurate as a model of the entire dialogue. It is therefore not 
an ideal candidate for trying out the systems over-all performance during system 
development. But for the smaller sub-segments or sub-dialogues, we believe that 
it creates a good approximation of what will take place once the system is up 
and running. Furthermore, we believe distilled dialogues in some respects to be 
more realistic than Wizard of Ozdialogues collected with a wizard acting as a 
computer. Another issue, t h a t has been discussed previously in the 
description of the method, is t h a t the distilling is made based on a 
particular view of what a dialogue with a computer will look like. While not 
necessarily being a detailed and specific model, it is at least an instance of a 
class of computer dialogue models.
